---
title: What I've learnt by working with the most popular esoteric programming language.
date: 2026-01-26
---

# What I've learnt by working with the most popular esoteric programming language.
I wrote this as the first and as a test post for my website.

This is what I've learnt by working with one of the most popular esoteric programming language: Brainfuck.
Brainfuck is an extreme minimalistic programming language. It only has 8 simple commands. 

I wrote the Brainfuck interpreter in C. It has a few modifications and hacks that will makes it a bit more
useful and faster. First of all, in Brainfuck there's usually a common sequence of instructions that you can just
optimize out e.g. `[-]`. This operations basically loop until the data in current cell to be 0. We can optimize 
this by just immediately set the current cell to 0 rather than looping until it become 0. Another modification is 
to add FFI (Foreign Function Interface). FFI is a common practice in an interpreted programming language to provide
a way to use a native or host system's functionality into the interpreted programming language. My Brainfuck interpreter
basically reuse the `.` syntax rather than printing the current cell's data as a character it basically act like 
a syscall in Linux where you provide the data as a stack in the tape then it will call the according function.

My initial goal with Brainfuck was to implement a Game of Life. But I quickly understand that working 
with brainfuck purely is a huge pain. With that insight in my mind, I decided to write a programming language that
will compile to Brainfuck. Both Brainfuck and Game Of Life is a Turing complete system
Any system of data-manipulation rules can be said turing complete if it can be used to simulate any 
turing machine (including itself). Thus my language (that's compiled into Brainfuck) also need to be turing complete.
On top of that, the language also need to be more expressive than Brainfuck since if it's not then there's no benefit 
on writing such language in the first place. 

So the language is a small stack-based and concatenative programming language inspired by [Forth] and [Porth]. 
The development of the language initially goes pretty well until I need to implement array. It took me a few weeks 
to understand that with my current approach (which will become clear later) won't be successful. Thus in the end I 
dropped the project. 

The problem of implementing array comes because Brainfuck as the underlying system doesn't have the capability of random access. Random access is basically the ability of computer to read or write data instantly from any location. Brainfuck doesn't have this capability since it only can move the data pointers and modify data pointed by the data pointer. 

### References:
```
=> https://github.com/bagasjs/bfpp The Project Repo
=> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brainfuck Brainfuck
=> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_completeness Turing Completeness
=> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forth_(programming_language) Forth
=> https://github.com/tsoding/porth Porth by Tsoding
```
